---
layout: post
title: My MacBook setup for coding and research
image: /assets/img/blog/macbook_pic.jpg
accent_image: 
  background: url('/assets/img/blog/jj-ying.jpg') center/cover
  overlay: false
accent_color: '#ccc'
theme_color: '#ccc'
description: >
  About the little gritty details that make the difference in my research workflow
invert_sidebar: true
categories: tools
---

# My MacBook setup for coding and research
I recently bought a new MacBook and decided to take the opportunity and rethink everything I do on my laptop, from coding over task management to citing papers. The setup I came up with is far from perfect, but for me personally the one I can work very well with. I hope that somebody might find one or two things I mention here useful, and if it is just me next year!


* toc
{:toc}

## Getting your shell right

I spend quite a lot of the time I spent on my laptop typing commands in the shell, so making this a pleasing experience was one of my main objectives. The standard zsh mac shell is not bad, but you can make quite some improvements over it. 

### Terminal Emulators: iTerms2 vs Hyper

First of all there are terminal emulators that you can use for a visually more pleasing experience and some cool extra features. The two main tools here are iTerms2 and Hyper. I personally chose iTerms2 since it is more established and more performant in many cases, but will keep a look on Hyper since it looks promising as well ([here](https://medium.com/@brianhague/why-i-switched-my-terminal-to-hyper-then-switched-back-f0bd06af4d7d) a comparison between the two).

### Making it pretty

With iTerms2 as well as Hyper there are quite some ways to further customize your shell. I personally like [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0MiGnwPdNGE) which helps you make style your shell as well as give it some nice shortcuts ([here](https://www.engineeringwithutsav.com/blog/spice-up-your-macos-terminal) the summary of the commands used in the video). Here is how my shell looked afterwards:

<>

Pretty nice if you ask me!

## Data Science workflows: jupyter, pyenv etc

MacOS comes with a default Python installation, but I try to avoid fiddling around with it since nightmares of clashing package requirements haunt me to this day at night. For managing these varying dependencies, people typically use pyenv or conda. I use both, but prefer pyenv since it is less bloated than conda and has given me less pain in the past. See [this post](https://engineeringfordatascience.com/posts/setting_up_a_macbook_for_data_science/) for how to set up pyenv and more!

## VS Code: the allrounder

Although the terminal is crucial for coding work, VS Code is my go-to IDE for development work. It is fast, lightweight and offers endless opportunities for customization.

### Styling VS Code

I like darker coding setups, so I chose the Night Owl theme by Sarah Drasner . You can get creative with the themes, there is everything from an awful red hotdog theme to win95 throwing you back into computing in the last century. 
On a more serious note, other dark themes I can recommend are Cobalt and Dracula; for light themes Night Owl Light or Hop Light are popular.

You can install all of these themes as extensions in VS Code and set it to your theme in the settings.

Talking about settings: You can either manipulate your settings via the GUI in Preferences or via the settings.json file which you find under Preferences > Settings > Extensions > Edit in settings.json. Here is mine for reference: 

~~~js
// file: "settings.json"
{
    //customize theme and font
    "workbench.colorTheme": "Night Owl",
    "terminal.integrated.fontFamily": "'SourceCodePro+Powerline+Awesome Regular'",
    //disable minimap
    "editor.minimap.enabled": false,
    //shift sidebar to right
    "workbench.sideBar.location": "right",
    //enable inline sugggestions
    "editor.inlineSuggest.enabled": true,
    //Settings for R in VSCode
    "r.rterm.mac": "/Users/kierandidi/.pyenv/versions/3.9.13/envs/standard_env/bin/radian",
    "r.bracketedPaste": true,
    "r.plot.useHttpgd": true,
    "r.rpath.mac": "/usr/local/bin/R",
    //get my iTerms terminal in VS Code as well
    "terminal.integrated.tabs.enabled": false,
    //sync my settings via SettingsSync
    "sync.gist": "6ba92e3a059eff6eb94ba5b9505d3304",
    "settingsSync.ignoredExtensions": [
    
    ]
}
~~~

Some of the settings only make sense after the next section about R in VS Code, but some of them are just useful in themselves, for example disabling the minimap (I never used it anyway) and moving the sidebar to the right (preventing your code from jumping around when you open and close the sidebar).

### Extensions in VS Code

There is an enormous number of extensions for VS Code out there, so it can be overwhelming sometimes to even start looking into customization. Here I provide a list of the ones I use with a oneliner explaining what they do/what I like about them. 

#### Version Control
- GitLens: shows you inline commit information and a lot more (the premium version is free for students via the GitHub education pack!)
- GitGraph: allows nice visualisation of the commit history, similar to the Network view on GitHub

### Cloud Computing
- AWS Toolkit: saves you a couple of visits to the management console if you use it wisely
- Terraform (Anton Kulikov): syntax highlighting for HCL and more 
- Docker: again saves you the journey to Docker Desktop
- Remote SSH: connect to remote machine and keep your beloved VS Code IDE!

### Code Quality
- ESLint: If you use JavaScript this extension helps with linting
- prettier: formatted code out of the box
- IntelliCode: helpful autocompletion
- GitHub Copilot: AI-assisted code suggestions (free for students!)
- Autodocstring: gives you a template for docstrings automatically
- ErrorLens: gives useful inline error suggestions

### R Development
- R language extension: syntax highlighting etc
- R Debugger: allows debugging for R programs

### Others
- SettingsSync: Allows syncing your VS Code setup so that you have the same settings on a new device
- Python: the suggested extension bundle for Python including linting and syntax highlighting
- Jupyter the suggested extension bundle for Jupyter notebooks
- vscode-pdf: easy transformation of code to pdf
- liveshare: codevelop with colleagues at the same time (similar to Google Docs)
- PathIntellisense: path completion 

For more hacks regarding VS Code, [this website](https://www.vscodecandothat.com/) and [this one](https://burkeholland.gitbook.io/vs-code-can-do-that/) provide some nice references and tricks.

### Running R in VS Code

The classic way to run R is in RStudio, but since I wanted to minimze the time I need for switching between several tools I wanted to set up R in VSCode. There are some great guides out there how to do, for example which [extensions to use](https://renkun.me/2022/03/06/my-recommendations-of-vs-code-extensions-for-r/) or [how to set it up step-by-step](https://schiff.co.nz/blog/r-and-vscode/). Here I only list the packages I currently use for R: 

- languageserver: to allow communication between the R shell and VS Code
- radian: huge improvement over the standard R shell


### Shortcuts in VS Code

Using shortcuts makes your life in VS Code a lot easier. Here are some of the common ones I use on MacOS; on Windows you often just have to replace `Cmd` with `Ctrl` and `Option` with `Alt`.

#### Workspace
- `Cmd` + `B`: toggle sidebar
- `Cmd` + `,`: open settings

### Navigating
- `Shift` + `Option` + `Up/Down`: duplicate line up/down
- `Option` + `Up/Down`: move line up/down
- `Shift` + `Cmd` + `K`: delete whole line

## Productivity Hacks

## Paper and Citation workflow: Zotero and Obsidian

## Closing thoughts



*[SERP]: Search Engine Results Page
